# Exame Epoca Normal 2018

## Exercise 1

### 1.1

> TODO

### 1.2 

The heuristic functions h1, h2 and h4 ara all admissible functions as they never overestimate the actual problem cost. The same does not apply to h3, which can overestimate in the cases that it has two ojects and the path to deliever each object has common parts, such as the following example:
- RXY _ _ _ _ Y X, the estimated cost is `5 + 6 = 11` when the actual cost is `6`.

### 1.3

The best is h3 because it has the closest value to the actual cost.

---

## Exercise 2

### 2.1

List with the machine number to produce each piece.

```
[A, B, C, D, E]
```

Subject ii)

```
[M1, M3, M2, M3, M3]
```

### 2.2

The function would be the most time spent by one of the used machines. If a subject uses two machines, the value would be the maximum ammount of time spent by one of those machines.

```
i) 
M1 = 10 + 7 + 8 = 25
M2 = 11 + 12 = 23
Max(25, 23) = 25

ii) 
M1 = 10
M2 = 11
M3 = 7 + 12 + 8 = 27
Max(10, 11, 27) = 27

iii) 
M1 = 10 + 7 = 17
M2 = 11 + 12 + 8 = 31
Max(17, 31) = 31

iv) 
M1 = 7
M2 = 10 + 11 + 12 + 8 = 41
Max(7, 41) = 41
```

### 2.3

Probability for each subject to be selected:

```
Total = 25 + 27 + 31 + 41 = 124

P(i) = 24 / 124 = 0.202 -> [0, 0.202]
P(ii) = 27 / 124 = 0,218 -> ]0.202, 0.420]
P(iii) = 31 / 124 = 0.250 -> ]0.420, 0.670]
P(iv) = 41 / 124 = 0.330 -> ]0.670, 1.000]
```

Selection Result:

```
i) [M1, M1, M2, M2, M1] (Elitism)
ii) (Random value = 0.22) [M1, M3, M2, M3, M3]
ii) (Random value = 0.40) [M1, M3, M2, M3, M3]
iv) (Random value = 0.88) [M2, M1, M2, M2, M2]
```

### 2.4

> TODO

---

## Exercise 4

### 4.1

An admissible heuristics is a heuristics that never overestimates the cost of a node. On the other hand, a consistent heuristics guarantees that the cost of a node is never higher than the sum of the parent's node cost and the cost to go from the parent to that node. That said, it is possible for an admissible heuristic to don't be consistent, as it may underestimate the cost in a node and have a better estimative in the next node which can be higher.

### 4.3

The probability of the acceptance of a state is given by the formula: `P(X) = e ^ (delta(E) / temperature)`. Being `delta(E) = 12 - 15 = -3` and `tempertature = 0.8`, the probability is `e ^ (-3 / 0.8) = 0,0235`.

### 4.6

Diagnostic rules, since it starts from observed effects towards the causes of these effects.
