# Exame Epoca Normal 2019

## Exercise 1

### 1.1

State: List with lenth 7 with values 1, -1 or 0, when the space has a Red piece, White piece or is empty.

Initial State: 
```
[1, 1, 1, 0, -1, -1, -1]
```

Objective:
```
[-1, -1, -1, 0, 1, 1, 1]
```

Operators:

M1R: 
- Move a red piece to an adjacent empty space
- There must be an empty space to the right of that red piece

M1W: 
- Move a white piece to an adjacent empty space
- There must be an empty space to the left of that white piece

M2R: 
- Jump over a piece to an empty space with a red piece
- There must be an empty space two spaces to the right of that red piece

M2W: 
- Jump over a piece to an empty space with a white piece
- There must be an empty space two spaces to the left of that white piece

M3R: 
- Jump over two pieces to an empty space with a red piece
- There must be an empty space three spaces to the right of that red piece

M3W: 
- Jump over two pieces to an empty space with a white piece
- There must be an empty space three spaces to the left of that white piece

Cost Function: Sum of the costs of every move made to get from the initial state to the objective state.


### 1.2 

h1) It is an admissible heuristics as it never overestimates the actual cost to get to the final state. This is a special heuristics to the A* algorithm that makes the algorithm behave like the Dijkstra algorithm.

h2) It isn't an admissible heuristics because when the number of moves left to get to the solution is less than 5, this heuristics overestimates the cost.

h3) This is an admissible heuristics because since we can only move one piece per move, this heuristics calculates the number of pieces in the wrong position, which means that we will need at least that number of moves to get to the final state.

### 1.3

As the cost of a move is never higher than the distance travelled in that move by a piece, a good heuristic would be to count the minimum number of spaces that each piece would have to move to be in the correct position. For this, we could use the following pseudocode:

```js
function heuristics(state) {
    let cost = 0;

    for (let i = 0; i < state.length; i++) {
        if (state[i] == -1)
            cost += Math.max(0, 4 - i)
        else if (state[i] == 1)
            cost += Math.max(0, i - 2)
    }

    return cost
}
```

### 1.4

DFS
```
[B B V B V V x]
[B B V B x V V]   
[B B V B V x V] 
(using [B B V B x V V])   
[B B x B V V V] 
(using [B B x B V V V])  
[B B B x V V V] -> Final state
```

BFS
```
[B B V B V V x]  
[B B V B x V V]  
[B B V B V x V] 
(using [B B V B x V V])  
[B B x B V V V] 
(using [B B V B V x V])  
[B B x B V V V]  
[B B V B x V V] 
(using [B B x B V V V])  
[B B B x V V V] -> Final State
```

---

## Exercise 2

### 2.1

Problem definition: File with positions, in `x y` format, of both factories in the first two lines. The following line would have the number of clients to visit, followed by this number of lines, where each line has the position, `x y`, of each client. Example:

```
0 4
3 0
5
4 4
0 2
3 4
2 3
3 2
```

The solution would be a list where each value represents the client number and the index represents the place in which it should be visited. Example: 

```
[2, 4, 3, 1, 5]
```

Evaluation function: 

```js
function evaluate(solution) { 
    let cost = 0

    for(let i = 1; i <= solution.length; i++) {
        if (i == 1) {     
            cost += dist(fab1, solution[i])
            cost += dist(solution[i], solution[i+1])
        }
        else if(i == solution.length)    
            cost += dist(solution[i], fab2)
        else      
            cost += dist(solution[i], solution[i+1])
    }

    return cost
}
```

### 2.2

A simple neighbourhood could be obtained by switching two places in the solution, which means, switching the order where two clients would be visited.

```js
function neighbourhood(solution) {
    let i = -1
    let j = -1

    while (i == j) {
        i = random(0, solution.length)
        j = random(0, solution.length)
    }

    let newSolution = solution
    newSolution[i] = solution[j]
    newSolution[j] = solution[i]

    return newSolution
}
```

### 2.3

```js
function getRandomSolution(numClients) {
    let sol = []

    while (sol.length < numClients)
        let i = random(1, numClients + 1)
        if (!sol.includes(i)) sol.append(i)

    return sol
}

function hillClimbing(numClients) {
    let currentSolution = getRandomSoltuion(numClients)

    for (let i = 0; i < 100; i++) {
        let newSolution = neighbourhood(currentSolution)
        if (evaluate(newSolution) > evaluate(currentSolution)) {
            currentSolution = newSolution
            i = 0
        }
    }

    return currentSolution
}
```

---

## Exercise 3

### 3.1

Yes because tic tac toe is a problem with a reduced state space. A simple reflex agent would be a quick way to solve the problem.

In order to implement this agent, it would have in a data structure the best move from the current game state. The current game state would contain the current board state and the player identifier (X or O).

### 3.2

The uniform cost search algorithm is complete and optimal. The A* is also complete and optimal only if the heuristics used is an admissible one, which it is. As all solutions have different costs, there is only one optimal solution, so both algorithms will find it.

### 3.3

a) `C`

b) `E`

c) `D`

d) `C`

e) `G`

### 3.4

In the minimax with alpha-beta cuts algorithm, the node sorting can have a huge impact in the performance of the algorithm as it may help to cut large portions of the search tree.

Let `B` be the ramification factor of the tree and `D` its depth.

If the nodes are sorted in the worst possible way, there won't be any cuts so the visited nodes will be `B^D`. In the best case, only `B^(D/2)` nodes will be visited.

### 3.5

a)
- A - `8`
- B - `3`
- C - `<=1`
- D - `8`

b) `O, Q, T, U, Y`

### 3.6

a) As it is a maximization problem and the neighbour has a lower value, its acceptance probability is `e^(delta(E)/temperature)` where `delta(E) = 18 - 20 = -2`. This means that the probability is `e^(-2/0.9) = 0.1084 = 10.84%`. This probability increases when the temperature increases and decreases when the difference between the old and new state increases.

b) As it is a minimization problem and the neighbour has a lower value, it will always be accepted.

